# Voter votes

[^1]:
    This explanation of the voter process is taken from [Usability Analysis of Helios - An Open Source Verifiable Remote Electronic Voting System](http://static.usenix.org/events/evtwote11/tech/final_files/Karayumak7-8-11.pdf)

The ballot casting application is implemented as a single-page web application using JavaScript. In particular, all necessary data is preloaded into the browser’s memory and the JavaScript code up- dates the rendered HTML user interface when any links or buttons are clicked. As a result, no Internet access is required from the time the data is loaded onto the web browser, until one is ready to cast their vote. Anyone using a modern web browser running JavaScript (e.g. Firefox 2 or later), is able to cast a vote.[^1]

**Admin has uploaded a voter list**

First, an invitation email containing the URL of the election page, an election fingerprint, the Voter-ID and the assigned password is sent to the voter.[^1] 

The voter clicks on the URL to open the ‘Voting Booth’ web-page which contains instructions on the voting procedure. After reading the instructions the voter presses the ‘Start’ button on this page to invoke a JavaScript session on their computer. The JavaScript code will lead the voter through the ballot casting procedure without a connection to the Internet. An empty ballot is first displayed. Upon making a selection, depending on the maximum number of candidates allowed, the voter gets a warning message pointing to the limit of the options. To continue the ballot casting process the voter clicks the ‘Proceed’ button and is forwarded to a page where all selected candidates are displayed. The voter can review their selection here, having then the chance to change this selection by clicking the link ‘Update’ or seal the ballot by pressing the button ‘Confirm Choices and Encrypt Ballot’.

To continue the process, the voter can either submit or verify their encrypted vote by pressing the ‘Proceed to Cast’ button or the ‘Audit’ link respectively. Note that on this page, the smart ballot tracker is displayed along with two links to ‘print’ or ‘email’ the smart ballot tracker. The voter should use either of these options or record the smart ballot tracker for later verification. The voter may also copy and paste this information elsewhere.
If the voter opts to verify, and clicks the ‘audit’ link, the JavaScript then displays a new page with the mathematical proofs of the encryption as well as instructions on how to verify the encrypted vote. The voter should copy the displayed information, click on the ‘Ballot Verifier’ link and paste the copied information into the ‘Helios Single-Ballot Verifier’ page which pops up. On clicking the ‘Verify’ button, they receive the results at the bottom of the page. As the ‘Helios Single-Ballot Verifier’ is an independent application with its own window, the voter can go back to the main ballot casting application at any time (e.g. by closing the verification application). In order to continue with the voting process, the voter clicks the ‘back to voting’ button. After that they will need to re-encrypt the ballot. The voter can then decide whether to cast the encrypted vote or to verify it again.

If voter clicks the ‘Proceed to Cast’ button they are forwarded to the login page where the smart ballot tracker is displayed again. The voter enters the Voter-ID and the assigned password from the invitation email in order to proceed. On pressing the ‘check credentials’ button, the system confirms eligibility. If they are authenticated, the voter can in the next step finally cast the vote (by pressing the ‘I am —, cast this ballot’ button). Alternatively they can click the ‘cancel’ button and cancel the election. A success message is displayed once the encrypted vote is successfully cast. The voter is redirected to the election information page by clicking the link ‘return to election info’. This page contains information on the election, verifying procedure and provides a link labeled ‘Vote in this election’ for the voter to start the election process afresh if they so choose. Finally, a confirmation email is sent to the voter.

Ballot preparation and casting including individual verifiability are based on Benaloh’s Simple Verifiable Voting Protocol, which is based on two aspects - separating ballot preparation/encryption and ballot casting as well as on Benaloh’s challenge. The idea of separation means that the ballot can be viewed, selections can be made, the ballot can be encrypted and the encryption can be verified without having to authenticate oneself and, thus, without being an eligible voter. The voter only needs to be authenticated for the final ballot casting. An advantage of this approach is that everyone (including election observers) can verify the ballot preparation mechanism.

In Benaloh’s challenge, the system commits to the encrypted vote and then voters can decide whether they want to verify or cast the vote. The software cannot falsify information by encrypting the wrong candidate since it does not know whether the voter will either verify or cast the encrypted vote. Voters will notice during verification if the wrong candidate name is encrypted. In order to ensure that the software provides the same ciphertext for verifiability and ballot casting (instead of sending the properly encrypted vote to the system in case of verifiability and the ciphertext of a wrong candidate in case of ballot casting), it commits to its encryption by displaying a hash value of the ciphertext, which is the smart ballot tracker.

Privacy requirements make it impossible to cast a verified vote. The verified encrypted vote therefore has to be re-encrypted. Correspondingly, a new hash value is computed and displayed. Thus, the voter cannot verify the encrypted vote they finally cast but must trust the system due to previous checks.

**Admin has set voting open to public**

If the admin has set up the election so that voting is open to any member of the public, a voter logs in using one of the Helios authentication options.  The voting process is the same as for a voter who is on a list that is uploaded by an election admin.
